To get started with Apache Iceberg on AWS, you’ll want to focus on two main areas: setting up Iceberg tables in AWS and choosing a query engine compatible with Iceberg, such as Amazon Athena, AWS Glue, or Apache Spark on EMR. Here's a general step-by-step guide:

1. Set Up S3 for Storage

Iceberg uses Amazon S3 to store data files and metadata.

Create an S3 bucket to use as the storage layer for your Iceberg tables. Ensure that you have the necessary permissions to read and write to this bucket.


2. Choose and Set Up a Catalog

Iceberg requires a catalog to manage table metadata. AWS Glue Catalog and Hive Metastore are popular options on AWS.

Using AWS Glue Catalog:

AWS Glue provides a fully managed cataloging service, which is natively supported by Iceberg.

Configure the Glue Catalog for your Iceberg tables, ensuring you have the necessary Glue permissions.


Using Hive Metastore on Amazon EMR:

Alternatively, you can set up a Hive Metastore on an EMR cluster and use it as your catalog.



3. Choose a Compute Engine

Iceberg supports several compute engines on AWS. Here are some options:

Amazon Athena:

Amazon Athena has native support for Iceberg, so you can directly query Iceberg tables using SQL.

Ensure Athena is configured to use AWS Glue as the catalog.


AWS Glue ETL (Apache Spark):

AWS Glue supports Iceberg through Spark, allowing you to run ETL jobs on Iceberg tables.

To enable Iceberg support, configure your AWS Glue job with the necessary Iceberg dependencies.


Amazon EMR (Apache Spark):

You can use Apache Spark on EMR to create and query Iceberg tables.

When launching an EMR cluster, add the Iceberg JAR files to Spark. This can be done via bootstrap actions or custom configurations.



4. Create and Manage Iceberg Tables

Use Spark, Athena, or another compatible tool to create and manage Iceberg tables.

In Spark (on Glue or EMR):

# Example Spark code to create an Iceberg table
spark.sql("CREATE TABLE my_iceberg_table (id bigint, name string) USING iceberg")

In Athena:

Use standard SQL to interact with the table once it’s defined in Glue.



5. Query and Update Data in Iceberg Tables

Use Athena, Glue, or Spark jobs to query and update data in your Iceberg tables.

Example Query:

SELECT * FROM my_iceberg_table WHERE id > 100;


6. Optimize and Manage Table Maintenance

Iceberg provides features like time travel, schema evolution, and partition evolution. These can be useful for managing large datasets in production environments.

Consider periodically running compaction jobs to optimize file sizes, especially if you have frequent updates.


Additional Resources

Iceberg Documentation

AWS Glue Documentation for Iceberg


